Add a document describing differences between Pylance and Pyright settings (#4172)
microsoft/pylance-release: USING_WITH_PYRIGHT.md

# Pyright and Pylance Together

[Pyright](https://github.com/Microsoft/pyright) is an open source version of a Python type checker that forms the basis for Pylance. Both Pyright and Pylance can be used inside of an IDE to provide a [language server](https://code.visualstudio.com/api/language-extensions/language-server-extension-guide#why-language-server) for Python code.

Pyright can also be used on the [command line](https://github.com/microsoft/pyright/blob/main/docs/command-line.md) to produce json or text output. This can be used in a variety of situations, like a pre-commit hook, or a [github action](https://github.com/jakebailey/pyright-action).

> However, Pylance and Pyright don't always produce the same results. The reason for this is a difference in configuration. 

Reviewer: There are multiple reasons including configuration differences and bundled stubs. Perhaps it's best to just say "There are several reasons why such differences may be observed." (or something to that effect).

> ## Stub differences

Reviewer: I recommend using the term "Type stub" at least once before using the more informal term "stub".

> Pylance comes bundled with a bunch of stubs, usually found here in the installation:

Author: Whoops, will fix.

```
<pylance-extension-install>/dist/bundled
<pylance-extension-install>/dist/native-stubs
```

> In order for Pyright to produce the same errors as Pylance it need to use the same stub files. 

Reviewer: Grammar nit: Delete "In order".

> In order for Pyright to produce the same errors as Pylance it need to use the same stub files. 

Reviewer: Another grammar nit: Include comma before "it needs to use". Also, "need" should be "needs".

> This might be done by copying the contents of each of those folders to a new folder. 

Reviewer: This sentence is pretty vague. Copying what folders into what new folder?

You'd then reference that new folder in your [pyrightconfig.json](https://microsoft.github.io/pyright/#/configuration)

```json
{

>     "stubPath": "./pylanceStubs"

Reviewer: It might be easier just to recommend that they place the stubs in a project-local "typings" directory. That way, no additional configuration is needed because pyright and pylance will both pick them up from that location.

If you retain the configuration section, then I recommend also including an example of how to configure it in `pyproject.toml`. I think that more pyright users use `pyproject.toml` than `pyrightconfig.json` nowdays.

}
```

Where `pylanceStubs` contains the contents of the `bundled` and `native-stubs` folders.

We have plans to make this easier in the [future](https://github.com/microsoft/pylance-release/discussions/3638).

## Settings differences

> Both Pylance and Pyright have [settings](https://github.com/microsoft/pylance-release#settings-and-customization) to control behavior. For the most part, they use the same values, but the few differences do have an impact on the analysis.

Reviewer: It might be worth talking about "language server settings" versus "pyright configuration settings". The latter are found in a `pyrightconfig.json` or `pyproject.toml` file and tend to override the former, although there are cases where the two are composed together. (It's complicated.) In general, if users want consistent behavior between pyright and pylance, I recommend that they do not use language server (e.g. VS Code) settings and instead set all of their configuration settings in the `pyrightconfig.json` or `pyproject.toml` file.

If users follow this recommendation, then you can remove most of the text below because pyright and pylance will both pick up these settings and act consistently between the two.

Author: Maybe I should add another entry to the table to specify the 'pyrightconfig.json' setting

Author: I don't think people using the IDE will want a pyrightconfig.json that can also be impacted by settings.json? Not sure. Does pyrightconfig.json work in the .vscode folder or does it have to be in the root of the project?

Reviewer: The `pyrightconfig.json` or `pyproject.toml` must be in the root of the project. This is consistent with other tools (e.g. `tsconfig.json`). This file is meant to be checked in and shared across all project contributors, whereas the ".vscode/settings.json" file is often not checked in (since it contains per-user settings in many cases).

We should confirm my assumption that "there are cases where the two are composed together". Perhaps that's not the case and `pyrightconfig.json` and `pyproject.toml` configuration settings always prevail. I think there are cases where that's not true though. For example, if you specify a language server setting but don't specify the corresponding setting in the config file, I think the language server setting prevails (as opposed to the default value for that setting).

Reviewer: In any case, what I say above is the advice I recommend to people who want the same behavior from pyright and pylance: don't use language server settings.

Author: I tried the following:

- pyrightconfig.json = reportUndefinedVariables = none
- user settings.json = reportUndefinedVariables = error
- workspace settings.json = reportUndefinedVariables = error

pyrightconfig.json wins.
 
Recommending using pyrighconfig.json seems like a good idea because it will always trump everything else.

| Setting | Pylance default | Pyright default | Description | Potential Impact |
|----|----|----|----|----|

> | python.analysis.autoSearchPaths | true | false|  Adds 'src' to the list of search paths | This may change what files are found when analyzing. So if you're getting missing imports for things in your 'src' tree, this might be why |

Reviewer: I think you can delete the section on "python.analysis.autoSearchPaths". I'm pretty sure that pyright and pylance use the same default value here, so if you don't override the default in your language server settings, you will get the same behaviors.

Author: This looks like the default is 'false' for pyright command line?
https://github.com/microsoft/pyright/blob/09c79ed3e284b953b4d96c240a2dca91d74b2eee/packages/pyright-internal/src/analyzer/service.ts#L699

Maybe I'm not following the code flow correctly here.

Reviewer: I guess I was mistaken. Looks like this default is different too. Another one we should consider changing to make them the same. I'm fine switching the default to true for pyright if you don't see any problem with that.

Author: Well except that people using it will suddenly get subtle differences. I guess we have no good way to notify people of these sort of things other than release notes.

Reviewer: Yes, in theory a user could see a change in behavior, but I think it's unlikely to affect many (any?) pyright users. If a user has a "src" directory, they probably already configure it as an import search path using "extraPaths".

| python.analysis.indexing | true | false | All files in the current virtual environment are parsed to a certain depth. This gives Pylance more information for auto import completions and other things. | This can have an impact on completions and hover information, but shouldn't impact errors returned.

> | python.analysis.useLibraryCodeForTypes | true | false | When true, this means 3rd party libraries are analyzed to produce type information. Without it, all 3 party libraries are just assumed to be of type Any unless they provided type information explicitly | This setting changes the types found by Pylance/Pyright. It can definitely cause differences in errors reported, so make this the same for both if you want consistent results. A lot of the time this is the sole cause of differences. |

Reviewer: I've been considering changing pyright's default for `useLibraryCodeForTypes` to true. This would be a breaking change for pyright users, but this would eliminate a common source of confusion for those who want to use both pyright and pylance. Thoughts?

Author: I assume it makes analysis slower? Like a lot slower? But more accurate. I'd pick accuracy over speed.

Reviewer: I'm not so concerned about analysis speed. The pyright CLI is much less sensitive to speed than pylance because the former is used in a batch manner. There's no human impatiently waiting for immediate feedback. :) 

The issue is with accuracy of type information. The original thinking was that pyright needed accurate type information for type checking, whereas pylance could get away with somewhat inaccurate (inferred) type information because it was focused mostly on completion suggestions. But our type inference has gotten good enough now that I think it's reasonable to default `useLibraryCodeForTypes` to true for pyright. Users can always disable it if it's giving them too many inaccurate types.

> | python.analysis.typeCheckingMode | off | basic | Determines what diagnostics are shown. | Pylance defaults to off, but there is a possibility that VS code will force this to 'basic' for pylance users. If you want to guarantee this is the same as Pyright, force it to 'basic' (or whatever you want to enforce) by specifying it in your settings.json|

Reviewer: I think you can delete the section on "python.analysis.typeCheckingMode". Now that pylance defaults to "basic", pyright and pylance use the same default value, so if you don't override the default in your language server settings, you will get the same behaviors.

Author: According to what Luciana mentioned, we're are only doing 'basic' for insiders at the moment.

Reviewer: Hmm. I think I'm correct in asserting that we've been running this experiment for the better part of a year. Presumably there was some question this experiment was trying to answer — probably to inform the decision to enable "basic" type checking in production? Do we not have enough data at this point to answer the question(s)? What additional data would be needed to finalize this decision?

> | python.analysis.diagnosticMode | openFilesOnly | openFilesOnly | Determines which files are analyzed. `openFilesOnly` means only those files that are open in an IDE | You'll likely set this to 'workspace' for the CI version of Pyright. This means Pylance would likely not give you all of the same errors since it's only looking at open files. |

Reviewer: The diagnosticMode has no bearing on which diagnostics are produced. It applies only to language servers, not the CLI. I recommend removing this section because it will cause confusion.

> | python.analysis.diagnosticSeverityOverrides | - | - | Allows a user to override the severity levels for individual diagnostic rules. | See below |

Reviewer: I think you can delete the section on "python.analysis.diagnosticSeverityOverrides". Pyright and pylance use the same default value here, so if you don't override the default in your language server settings, you will get the same behaviors.

## Diagnostic severity overrides

Both Pylance and Pyright specify a custom [`python.analysis.diagnosticSeverityOverrides`](https://microsoft.github.io/pyright/#/configuration?id=diagnostic-rule-defaults) setting. Differences in this setting have a direct impact on the diagnostics returned. If you were attempting to get the same error output for both, making sure this setting is consistent is probably the first thing to do.

> ### Diagnostic Severity Overrides to match Pyright defaults

Reviewer: I recommend deleting this section because these defaults are the same between pyright and pylance. Including it here will confuse users more than help. If, for some reason, you think that it's important to explain the default values, I recommend simply providing a link to [pyright's documentation](https://microsoft.github.io/pyright/#/configuration?id=diagnostic-rule-defaults) rather than duplicating all of this information here. It will inevitably become stale as we add more diagnostic rules.

Here's the settings you would provide to Pylance based on which Pyright mode you are using:

<details>
  <summary>Pyright 'off' mode</summary>

```json
{

>     "python.anaylsis.diagnosticSeverityOverrides": {

Reviewer 2: Could we limit this to just the diagnostics which differ? I thought `reportShadowedImports` was the only one that was different? But maybe I'm misunderstanding what issue this is addressing.

Author: No a bunch of them differ. And it was easier to just list this out than try and keep track of the differences.

Reviewer: Oh, I forgot about `reportShadowedImports`. That one does differ between pyright and pylance, doesn't it? 

If so, we should consider removing this difference. If we decide to leave the difference, then I agree with Erik that we should simply document the difference rather than repeating all of the default values that do not differ.

Reviewer 2: Weird. Based on these comments from Eric I thought it was just that one. Maybe we should consider getting these back in sync?

https://github.com/microsoft/pylance-release/issues/3857#issuecomment-1407167773
https://github.com/microsoft/pylance-release/issues/3857#issuecomment-1407208449

Author: Maybe this was the wrong spot to look, but if you compare the default values in https://github.com/microsoft/pyright/blob/main/packages/vscode-pyright/package.json with the values in https://github.com/microsoft/pyrx/blob/main/packages/vscode-pylance/package.json, they differ in like 12 spots

Reviewer: Hmm, that's the documentation, not the source of truth. I think if you look at the source of truth in the code (https://github.com/microsoft/pyright/blob/09c79ed3e284b953b4d96c240a2dca91d74b2eee/packages/pyright-internal/src/common/configOptions.ts#L421), I think (hope?) that you'll see more consistency. If you're finding many differences in the documentation, we should fix those as well to ensure that they're consistent with the behaviors defined in the code.

Author: Okay I'll enter a bug to fix the documentation in the pylance extension. Althought it's kind of ambiguous there too because the default type checking mode is off, unless you're in an experiment, then it's basic. Which changes the default value for a bunch of settings.

Reviewer: I thought that experiment ended a long time ago and now everyone was opted in to "basic" by default. Is that not the case? If not, why is the experiment still going after more than a year? What additional information is needed to make a decision?

Author: Not sure myself, @luabud do you know if this is at 100% or not? Perhaps we can just eliminate the experiment now?

        "reportUnknownLambdaType": "error",
        "reportUnknownMemberType": "error",
        "reportUnknownParameterType": "error",
        "reportUnknownVariableType": "error",
        "reportUnnecessaryCast": "error",
        "reportUnnecessaryComparison": "error",
        "reportUnnecessaryContains": "error",
        "reportUnnecessaryIsInstance": "error",
        "reportUnusedClass": "error",
        "reportUnusedImport": "error",
        "reportUnusedFunction": "error",
        "reportUnusedVariable": "error",
        "reportUntypedBaseClass": "error",
        "reportUntypedClassDecorator": "error",
        "reportUntypedFunctionDecorator": "error",
        "reportUntypedNamedTuple": "error",
        "reportCallInDefaultInitializer": "none",
        "reportImplicitOverride": "none",
        "reportImplicitStringConcatenation": "none",
        "reportMissingSuperCall": "none",
        "reportPropertyTypeMismatch": "none",
        "reportShadowedImports": "none",
        "reportUninitializedInstanceVariable": "none",
        "reportUnnecessaryTypeIgnoreComment": "none",
        "reportUnusedCallResult": "none",
    }
}
```

</details>
</br>

> You would add these settings to your settings.json when running inside of VS Code.

Reviewer: For users who are using both pyright and pylance, I recommend against using VS Code settings. They should instead use `pyrightconfig.json` or `pyproject.toml`. As I mentioned above, this guarantees that they will get consistent results.

This might be done by copying the contents of each of the bundled Pylance stub folders to a new folder. 

You'd then reference that new folder in your [pyrightconfig.json](https://microsoft.github.io/pyright/#/configuration)

```json
{
    "stubPath": "./pylanceStubs"
}
```

or pyproject.toml

```ini
[tool.pyright]
stubPath="./pylanceStubs"
```

Where `pylanceStubs` contains the contents of the `bundled` and `native-stubs` folders.

We have plans to make this easier in the [future](https://github.com/microsoft/pylance-release/discussions/3638).

## Settings differences

Both Pylance and Pyright have [settings](https://github.com/microsoft/pylance-release#settings-and-customization) to control behavior. For the most part, they use the same values, but the few differences, described below, do have an impact on the analysis.

| Setting | Pylance default | Pyright default | Description | Potential Impact |
|----|----|----|----|----|
| python.analysis.autoSearchPaths | true | false|  Adds 'src' to the list of search paths. | This may change what files are found when analyzing. So if you're getting missing imports for modules in your 'src' tree, this might be why. |

> | python.analysis.indexing | true | false | All files in the current virtual environment are parsed to a certain depth. This gives Pylance more information for features such as auto import. | This can have an impact on completions and hover information, but shouldn't impact errors returned.|

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| python.analysis.indexing | true | false | This setting enables all files in the current virtual environment to be parsed to a certain depth. This gives Pylance more information for features such as auto import. | This can have an impact on completions and hover information, but shouldn't impact errors returned.|

```

| python.analysis.useLibraryCodeForTypes | true | false | When true, 3rd party libraries are analyzed to produce type information. Without it, all 3rd party library types are assumed to be of type `Any` unless they provided type information explicitly. | This setting changes the types found by Pylance/Pyright and therefore can cause differences in errors reported, so make this the same for both if you want consistent results. A lot of the time this is the sole cause of differences. |

> | python.analysis.typeCheckingMode | off | basic | Determines what diagnostics are shown. | Pylance defaults to `off`, but there is a possibility that VS code will force this to `basic` for Pylance users. If you want to guarantee this is the same as Pyright, set it to `basic` (or whatever you want to enforce) by specifying it in your settings.json. |

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
| python.analysis.typeCheckingMode | off | basic | Determines what diagnostics are shown. | Pylance defaults to `off`, but there is a possibility that VS code will default this to `basic` for Pylance users. If you want to guarantee this is the same as Pyright, set it to `basic` (or whatever you want to enforce) by specifying it in your settings.json. |

```

Reviewer 3: force might be a strong word. It defaults to basic in VS Code insiders and to off in VS Code stable.

Pyright can also be used on the [command line](https://github.com/microsoft/pyright/blob/main/docs/command-line.md) to produce json or text output. This can be used in a variety of situations, like a [pre-commit hook](https://github.com/microsoft/pyright/blob/main/docs/ci-integration.md#running-pyright-as-a-pre-commit-hook), or a [github action](https://github.com/jakebailey/pyright-action).

However, Pylance and Pyright don't always produce the same results. There are several reasons why this may happen.

## Type stub differences

Pylance comes bundled with a number of stubs, usually found here in the installation:

```
<pylance-extension-install>/dist/bundled
<pylance-extension-install>/dist/native-stubs
```

For Pyright to produce the same errors as Pylance, it needs to use the same stub files. 

This might be done by copying the contents of each of the bundled Pylance stub folders to a new folder. 

> You'd then reference that new folder in your [pyrightconfig.json](https://microsoft.github.io/pyright/#/configuration)

Reviewer 4: I think we want to list where got them?

https://github.com/microsoft/python-type-stubs and other ones we pull.

Author: I think we'd handle that when we create an repository to make this easier. I mean I figure we'll just use git submodule and reference all of the locations that way.

```json
{
    "stubPath": "./pylanceStubs"
}
```

or pyproject.toml

```ini
[tool.pyright]
stubPath="./pylanceStubs"
```

Where `pylanceStubs` contains the contents of the `bundled` and `native-stubs` folders.

We have plans to make this easier in the [future](https://github.com/microsoft/pylance-release/discussions/3638).

## Settings differences

Both Pylance and Pyright have [settings](https://github.com/microsoft/pylance-release#settings-and-customization) to control behavior. For the most part, they use the same values, but the few differences, described below, do have an impact on the analysis.

| Setting | Pylance default | Pyright default | Description | Potential Impact |
|----|----|----|----|----|
| python.analysis.autoSearchPaths | true | false|  Adds 'src' to the list of search paths. | This may change what files are found when analyzing. So if you're getting missing imports for modules in your 'src' tree, this might be why. |

> | python.analysis.indexing | true | false | This setting enables all files in the current virtual environment to be parsed to a certain depth. This gives Pylance more information for features such as auto import. | This can have an impact on completions and hover information, but shouldn't impact errors returned.|

Reviewer 4: this option doesn't exist in pyright and this shouldn't impact type info. so I think we can omit it or have different section that shows pylance only or pyright only options.
